Docs/tabs documentation (#229)
warp-ds/warp-portal-poc: docs/components/tabs/accessibility.md

This is because aria-controls and aria-labelledby rely on id attributes, and they are required for the tabs to be ARIA compliant.
:::

### Naming the tab set

The tab list has no accessible name of its own. On a page with one tab set that's fine. With two or more, a screen reader user hears two identical, unlabelled tab lists.

Give each set a name through the surrounding content — a heading immediately before it, or a labelled region:

```html
<section aria-labelledby="product-sections">
  <h2 id="product-sections">Product information</h2>
  <w-tabs active="overview">…</w-tabs>
</section>
```

### Panels without focusable content

A panel that contains only text is not reachable by keyboard: <kbd>Tab</kbd> moves from the tab row straight past it. Add `tabindex="0"` to those panels so the content can be focused and scrolled.

```html
<w-tab-panel id="overview" tabindex="0">
  Plain text with nothing focusable inside.
</w-tab-panel>
```

Don't add `tabindex` to panels that already contain a link, button, or field — that creates a redundant stop.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
Don't add `tabindex` to panels whose first content element is already focusable — that creates a redundant stop." Matches the APG condition precisely.

```

## ARIA

The component builds this structure:

| Element | Role | Attributes it manages |
| --- | --- | --- |
| The tab row | `tablist` | — |
| Each tab | `tab` | `aria-selected`, `aria-controls`, roving `tabindex` |
| Each panel | `tabpanel` | `aria-labelledby`, `aria-hidden` |

Only the selected tab carries `tabindex="0"`; the rest are `-1`. That's what makes the whole set a single stop in the tab order, with the arrow keys moving inside it.

### Associating tabs with panels

On the web, each `<w-tab>` names its panel with `for`, matching the panel's `id`. The component derives `aria-controls` and `aria-labelledby` from that pair, so the association only works if the ids are right.

```html
<w-tabs active="specifications">
  <w-tab for="overview">Overview</w-tab>
  <w-tab for="specifications">Specifications</w-tab>
  <w-tab-panel id="overview">…</w-tab-panel>
  <w-tab-panel id="specifications">…</w-tab-panel>
</w-tabs>
```

If a tab has no `id` of its own, one is generated for it, so the panel always has something to be labelled by.

::: warning Warning

> In **React** and **Vue**, ids are derived from the `name` prop and prefixed with `warp-tab-` and `warp-tabpanel-`. Those names must be unique across the entire document, not just within one tab set. `aria-controls` and `aria-labelledby` rely on `id` attributes, and duplicates silently break the association — so two tab sets both using `name="one"` will point at each other's panels.

Reviewer: We can leave this section as it was before, it applies to Elements as well

> In **React** and **Vue**, ids are derived from the `name` prop and prefixed with `warp-tab-` and `warp-tabpanel-`. Those names must be unique across the entire document, not just within one tab set. `aria-controls` and `aria-labelledby` rely on `id` attributes, and duplicates silently break the association — so two tab sets both using `name="one"` will point at each other's panels.

Author: ```suggestion
The `name` attributes will be used to generate `id` attributes (prefixed with `warp-tab-` and `warp-tabpanel-`), and therefore they must be unique throughout the entire DOM.
This is because aria-controls and aria-labelledby rely on id attributes, and they are required for the tabs to be ARIA compliant.```

:::

### Naming the tab set

The tab list has no accessible name of its own. On a page with one tab set that's fine. With two or more, a screen reader user hears two identical, unlabelled tab lists.

Give each set a name through the surrounding content — a heading immediately before it, or a labelled region:

```html
<section aria-labelledby="product-sections">
  <h2 id="product-sections">Product information</h2>
  <w-tabs active="overview">…</w-tabs>
</section>
```

### Panels without focusable content

A panel that contains only text is not reachable by keyboard: <kbd>Tab</kbd> moves from the tab row straight past it. Add `tabindex="0"` to those panels so the content can be focused and scrolled.

```html
<w-tab-panel id="overview" tabindex="0">
  Plain text with nothing focusable inside.
</w-tab-panel>
```

> Don't add `tabindex` to panels that already contain a link, button, or field — that creates a redundant stop.

Reviewer: I don't know if this is sound advice to be honest. Any source for that?

Author: Claude scans Figma, elements, iOS and android repos, as well as some other DS sites (but that's only for the usage part), so it could likely be hallucinations. If it's not adding any value then I think we can easily just remove it.

Author: The source is the [WAI-ARIA APG Tabs pattern](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/tabs/), under Keyboard Interaction:

> When the tabpanel does not contain any focusable elements or the first element with content is not focusable, the tabpanel should set `tabindex="0"` to include it in the tab sequence of the page.

Reading it again though, I think you're right that my line overshoots it. The APG condition is an *or* — a panel can contain a link or button and still need `tabindex="0"` if the first thing in it is text. My wording would tell you to skip it in exactly that case.

Two options:

- **Fix it** — "Don't add `tabindex` to panels whose first content element is already focusable — that creates a redundant stop." Matches the APG condition precisely.
- **Drop it** — the positive guidance above already covers the common case.

Slight preference for fixing, since the redundant-stop problem is real and easy to hit, but happy either way. Which would you prefer?

Reviewer: Thanks. +1 on the Fix it.

## Keyboard interaction

| Key | Behaviour |
| --- | --- |
| <kbd>Tab</kbd> | Moves focus into the tab list, landing on the **selected** tab. Pressing it again leaves the list and moves to the next focusable element |
| <kbd>←</kbd> | Selects and focuses the previous tab |
| <kbd>→</kbd> | Selects and focuses the next tab |
| <kbd>Home</kbd> | Selects and focuses the first tab |
| <kbd>End</kbd> | Selects and focuses the last tab |
| <kbd>Space</kbd> / <kbd>Enter</kbd> | Selects the focused tab |

Two details worth knowing:

- **The set does not wrap.** <kbd>→</kbd> stops on the last tab and <kbd>←</kbd> stops on the first, rather than cycling round.
- **Selection is automatic.** Arrowing onto a tab selects it and shows its panel immediately. This is the right pattern when panels are cheap to render; if a panel triggers an expensive load, that cost is paid on every arrow press.

> Arrow presses combined with <kbd>Alt</kbd>, <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>, or <kbd>Shift</kbd> are ignored, so browser and screen reader shortcuts keep working.

Reviewer: This part seems a bit much I think

Author: Yep, good point. It's pretty generic stuff that we'll then have to add everywhere else if we want to be consistent.

## Touch and click targets

| Platform | Minimum | Warp tabs |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Web | 44×44px | Tab height comes from 16px top padding, 8px bottom padding, and the 4px indicator around the label — comfortably above the 24×24px WCAG 2.2 AA minimum |
| Android | 48×48dp | `WarpTabRow` is 48dp tall |
| iOS/iPadOS | 44×44pt | The segmented control is 44pt tall |

The Figma component is drawn at **34px** tall, which is shorter than what the web implementation renders. Don't treat the Figma height as the touch target when you're checking a design against the guidance above.

Width is the more common failure. A one-word tab like "Map" is narrow, and narrow neighbours are easy to mis-tap. Keep the tabs in a set to similar widths, and prefer fewer tabs over squeezing more in.

## Visual accessibility

**Contrast** — measured against a white surface:

| Element | Colour | Ratio | Requirement |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Unselected label | `#5C5C66` | 6.61:1 | 4.5:1 (text) ✓ |
| Selected label | `#0063FB` | 5.03:1 | 4.5:1 (text) ✓ |

> | Active indicator | `#0063FB` | 5.03:1 | 3:1 (non-text) ✓ |

Reviewer: These colors vary by theme though
